FIP-0044 Add FIP for Standard Authentication Method for Actors (#424)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-draft_authenticate_method.md

---

> fip: <to be assigned>

Reviewer: FIP0044 please

title: Standard Authentication Method for Actors

> author: Alex North (@anorth), Aayush Rajasekaran (@arajasek)

Reviewer 2: Please list yourself as first author

discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/413
status: Draft
type: Technical (Interface)

> created: 2022-09-02

Reviewer 3: May i borrow your time machine?

replaces: [FIP-0035](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0035.md)
---

## Simple Summary

The Filecoin protocol has entities called "actors" that can be involved in computation on the Filecoin blockchain. 
There are various different kinds of actors; among the most common are accounts and multisigs. 
With [the planned introduction of the Filecoin Virtual Machine](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0030.md), there will be many new kinds of user-defined actors.

> Unfortunately, today, the only kind of actors that can be asked to verify whether they have authorized a piece of data are account actors -- they do so through a signature validation.

Reviewer 2: "Authenticate" is the right term to use throughout this FIP. This is all about attesting to the authenticity of some message. Authorization refers to what some (authenticated) party is allowed to do (think ACLs). That's a topic for the party sending this message, not the receiver.

This FIP is the starting point to evolve a convention by which any actor can verify such authorization. It simply proposes adding a special "authorize" message that actors can choose to implement. 
If they do so, it can be used by other actors to validate their authorization of data.

## Abstract

There is a need for arbitrary actors to be able to authorize (to other actors) that they have approved of a piece of data. This need will become more pressing with the Filecoin Virtual Machine.
This FIP proposes adding an `Authorize` message that any actor can choose to implement. This message can be called by any other actor to verify whether the "authorizer"

> approves of a piece of data. This is a small change to the existing actors, and allows for user-defined actors to flexibly implement this method according to their needs.

Reviewer 2: Mention the concrete actual change here, which is to the built-in account and storage market actors?

## Change Motivation

We want any actors, including user-defined actors, to be able to confirm that they have authorized some data.
If we don't have this ability, we will need to engineer around it in painful ways. The proposed [FIP-0035](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0035.md)
is a concrete example; it proposes adding several new methods and data types in order to enable
user-defined actors to serve as clients for storage deals. 

It will be infeasible to modify the builtin-actors themselves every time we want to be able to authorize some new kind of information, and doing so will require more total messages 

> to be landing on the Filecoin blockchain. Instead, a flexible, universal approach for actors to authorize data would be preferred.

Reviewer 2: Mention the concrete capability motivation of user actors being clients of the built-in market.

Author: I do so in the previous paragraph, will move things around.

## Specification

We propose adding the following method to the built-in `Account` Actor. 
This method can then be the blueprint for other builtin actors (eg. the multisig actor), 
as well as a template for user-defined actors.

```
    /// Authenticates whether the provided authorization is valid for the provided message.
    /// Errors if the authentication is invalid.
    pub fn verify_authorization(params: VerifyAuthorizationParams) -> Result<(), ActorError>

> ```

Reviewer 2: Define the exit code to be returned if authentication fails?

others can choose not to support this endpoint at all -- the Filecoin protocol's singleton builtin-actors
such as the Storage Power Actor, the System Actor, the Cron Actor, etc. will likely choose to omit this method.

## Backwards Compatibility

Introducing new methods to the builtin-actors needs a network upgrade, but otherwise breaks no backwards compatibility.

## Test Cases

Proposed test cases include:

- that the `verify_authorization` method on account actors can be called and succeeds with valid input
- that the `verify_authorization` method on account actors can be called, but fails with invalid input
- that storage deals can be made with the changes to the `StorageMarketActor`

## Security Considerations

We need to be careful with the security of the `verify_authorization` implementations of the
builtin-actors. User-defined contracts are free to implement these methods as they see fit.

This FIP only proposes adding the `verify_authorization` method to the account actor, which 
simply invokes the signature validation syscall.

## Incentive Considerations

This proposal is generally well-aligned with the incentives of the network. It can be considered

> as a simpler replacement for FIP-0035, with the only drawback being that this proposal as currently written does not allow for multisigs to be storage clients. It would be trivial 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as a simpler replacement for FIP-0035, with the only drawback being that this proposal as currently written does not allow for the existing built-in multisig actor to be a storage client. It would be trivial 
```
